CMPSC 465 Data Structures & Algorithms
Fall 2025 Ke Chen and Yana Safonova Worksheet 2
Monday, Sep 15, 2025
1. k-th Smallest. Given two sorted arrays AandBof size mandnrespectively, and an integer k, 1≤
k≤m+n, design an algorithm to find the k-th smallest number in AandB. Describe your algorithm
and analyze the running time of your algorithm. Your algorithm should run in O(log(m+n))time.
2. Matrices. Ais an n×nmatrix containing integers. For simplicity, you may assume nis a power of
2. Design a divide-and-conquer algorithm to find the maximum element of A. Write the recurrence
relation for the time complexity and report its runtime in Θnotation. What do you observe?
3. Selection. Consider the selection algorithm in which the input elements are divided into groups of 7.
Write the recurrence to describe the worst-case running time of the algorithm and find the solution of
the recurrence.
4. Selection. Suppose you have a black box algorithm A1 that finds the ⌊n/10⌋-th smallest of nelements
(for any given n). Show that you can find the median of nelements by making O(1)calls to A1 and
using no other pairwise element-comparisons.
5. Merge. A k-way merge operation. Suppose you have ksorted arrays, each with nelements, and you
want to combine them into a single sorted array of knelements.
a) Here’s one strategy: Using the merge procedure, merge the first two arrays, then merge in the
third, then merge in the fourth, and so on. What is the time complexity of this algorithm, in
terms of kandn?
b) Give a more efficient solution to this problem, using divide-and-conquer.
6. Array Rotations. Consider a rotation operation that takes an array and moves its last element to the
beginning. After nrotations, an array [a0,a1,a2...am−1]of size mwhere 0 <n≤m, will become:
[am−n,am−n+1,..., am−2,am−1,a0,a1,...am−n−1]
Notice how am−1is adjacent to a0in the middle of the new array. For example, two rotations on the
array [1,2,3,4,5]will yield [4,5,1,2,3].
You are given a list of unique integers nums , which was previously sorted in ascending order, but has
now been rotated an unknown number of times. Find the number of rotations in O(logn)time. (Hint:
consider Binary Search.)
CMPSC 465, Fall 2025, Worksheet 2 1