CMPSC 465 Data Structures & Algorithms
Fall 2025 Ke Chen and Yana Safonova Quiz 5
Lecture Section: Monday, Oct 06, 2025
Student Name: PSU Email ID:
1.(2 pts.) Suppose AandBare two strongly con-
nected components in a directed graph, and there
is an edge from a vertex in Ato a vertex in B. Con-
sider an arbitrary run of DFS on the graph that as-
signs pre and post numbers to each node. Which
of the following must be true?
amax w∈Apost (w)>max v∈Bpost (v)
bmax w∈Apre(w)<max v∈Bpre(v)
cmax w∈Apost (w)<max v∈Bpost (v)
dNone of the above
Answer (a)max w∈Apost (w)>max v∈Bpost (v)
When running DFS, if Ais visited first, the vertex
with an edge to Bwill have a higher post number
than every vertex in B. IfBis visited first, Acannot
be reachable, or they would not be separate SCCs.
DFS will assign post numbers to Bwithout visiting
A, and will have to visit Alater.
2.(2 pts.) In an unweighted, connected, undirected
graph, which of the following is true about using
BFS to find shortest paths from a given node S?
aBFS may fail if the graph has cycles.
bBFS works only on trees.
cBFS always finds the shortest path.
dBFS doesn’t work on undirected graphs.
Answer: (c) BFS always finds the shortest path.
As long as the graph is unweighted, BFS always
finds the shortest path.
3.(2 pts.) Dijkstra’s Algorithm does not work
correctly on:aDirected weighted graphs
bGraphs with negative-weight edges
cUndirected unweighted graphs
Answer: (b) Graphs with negative-weight edges
Dijkstra’s algorithm assumes that once a node is fi-
nalized, its shortest path is known — which fails if
a shorter path appears later via a negative edge.
4.(2 pts.) In a weighted graph where the weights
of all edges are distinct, there is always a unique
shortest path between two connected vertices.
aTrue
bFalse
Answer: (b) False
A counterexample is a graph where one edge of
weight 3 connects the source and destination, and
another path through a third node has weights 1
and 2.
5.(2 pts.) In Dijkstra’s algorithm, after a vertex u
is added to the visited set R, which of the following
is always true?
adist (u)may still decrease later due to a
shorter path.
bdist (u)is equal to the true shortest-path dis-
tance from the source.
cdist (u)is the minimum among all vertices in
the graph.
duhas no outgoing edges.
Answer: (b)dist (u)is equal to the true shortest-
path distance from the source. Because Dijkstra’s
algorithm always selects the vertex with the small-
est tentative distance, ensuring the shortest path to
it is already found when it’s added to R.
CMPSC 465, Fall 2025, Quiz 5 1